I
Look, I we are gonna have a reasonably tight,
I'm precious. Maybe we just start
There. Yeah, we might
just, yeah.
I reckon well, we'll invite you guys to come
to the table anyway, because we've got, um, 'cause
and if we have, can't get hold of and we'll hear from you.
Um, so if you bring your team, uh, whoever's,
whoever's made the cut, we can get another seat there.
We're not restricted by three seats. We,
We, we will, we could swap places.
Alright. The committee to bring people up.
We're very flexible. Committee, if you did want
to bring someone up, you're welcome to just the, um,
the microphones are our only restriction.
Thanks. Okay. No luck. All well look, thanks very much.
Um, uh, I'm stop Greg O'Connor there.
She, uh, um, just introduce ourselves. Greg
Fleming, uh, national Party at the Philipp, uh,
Paula Garcia, Newlin National Party, MP
Thanks. Go us
green from port.
Alright. We, we can only really speak to what the,
the papers provided and submission.
So look forward to hearing from you.
Great. Would it be helpful for us
to introduce yourself? Yes, please.
Yes. You're great. Thanks. So, I'm Ben Sims,
I'm the manager of the corporate system
Policy team and I'll pass to my right.
Uh, I'm Jim McCleon, um,
policy advisor, court system policy,
Uh, Koto called Richard Williams.
I'm the regional manager, courts
and tribunals for the lower North region based in Wellington
And behind us we have some of our, uh, data, uh,
technical experts
As well. The ones that do all
the real work. That's the usual case.
Alright, carry on.
Um, firstly we wanted
to check whether we should take the submission as read.
Yes. Yeah, yeah. Is,
Um, we have one additional point to bring
to your attention that being that when the ministry
provided it's written submission,
the minimum hourly wage was $23 15,
but as of the 1st of April this year, that increased
to $23 50.
So the ministry's written submission
was based on that previous.
Oh, great. Um, understand, we'll take the submission
as read, but I might highlight a few of our key points
That would be useful.
The first being that jury service is a civic duty
and enables the community to both, um, participate in
and support the administration of justice.
Juror fees are intended to recognize this contribution,
but are not intended to replace
or fully compensate, um, any lost wages or income.
In addition to, um, receiving fees, jurors can also seek
reimbursement for specific costs that they may incur as part
of, um, undertaking jury service.
Um, for example, um, costs include, um, costs for transport,
childcare, and, um, car parking.
Mm-hmm. Juror fees were last updated in
2004.
Um, and any change to the fees would of course have, um,
financial implications.
Um, we're now very happy
to take any specific questions you may
have on our submission.
So, so those fees were updated in actual dollar
terms last in
2004? In 2004,
yeah.
Yes. Alright. Alright. Members?
Yes. Yeah. Um, thank you very much, Peter.
Paul, I, it was interesting
before I read your report, I guess I was probably leaning
towards the, the, the argument.
But as I went, uh, to the petitioner's argument, uh,
it seemed just on prime of face, they reasonable
that people should receive a minimum wage.
Um, but the way you framed it, both in terms of, I mean,
you just summarized really well there, thank you again.
But, um, also the fact towards the end of your report,
you talked about how few, uh,
or how little negative feedback you receive from people
around the actual pay
and that it seems to be largely
from other members of the public.
Was the inference in that report really that it's,
that it's less that those kinds of, um, critiques
of the pay are coming from participants as opposed to, um,
uh, onlookers to the system perhaps?
Was that a fair reading? I
Think it's hard for us to assess exactly how,
uh, or where, uh, the rates
of fees might impact level of participation.
Yeah. We have quite a limited data set in terms of, uh,
the information that we, we collect a about jurors.
Um, basically random selection.
Uh, we get certain information, uh, from re people
who are registered on the electoral role, who are eligible
to be selected.
Uh, we get, uh, applications for Excusals.
Uh, but we can't necessarily tie, uh, those,
the, the level of attendance
or why somebody, uh, might not attend jury service
to, uh, the, the issue of how much, uh,
fees impact those decisions.
Yeah, you go, you got a supplementary I'm
Okay. Well, just one thing I
was gonna say about, so this,
do most people get excused before they arrive?
So it, they'll write in or that that work will be done.
So what about people who turn up on the day?
Is that another subgroup who get excused then? Um,
Yeah. Um, that
there are, um, on the day, um, requests,
but they, they might relate to, um,
unexpected circumstances such as a bereavement that,
you know, um, may, you know,
indicates they should be excused.
Right. It's a judicial discretion on the day.
Whereas, uh, in advance of that,
we ministry staff are delegated to consider the requests.
Um, I think we covered off in the, um, submission, kind of
standard requests, um, relating to health,
um, age
Religious Grounds might be some
of the standard more standard requests.
We, we tend to, if people indicate that
that date is not suitable,
we will defer rather than decline.
So that helps us, um, maintain reasonable numbers
so they can defer it to a date.
So if they had overseas travel plan, we would defer it
to a date that, um, is more suitable.
Okay. Um, the other thing I was just gonna ask is
that do government public servants get paid?
Is it automatic? Is there a policy across the public service
about if public services get called, do they get paid
or is it up to different departments?
I wouldn't, uh, be able to comment
with any authority across the board.
Uh, I think that the general issue of, uh, do employers
reimburse, uh, employees, um, for attending jury service?
Some do, some, some don't.
Right. I was guess if you're salaried,
if you're a salaried staff,
you probably are getting gonna get reimbursed.
But if you are wage an hourly staff, there's no, that's
what I was thinking is I read through this, is
that if you're an hourly wage worker, you're more likely
to be, um,
financially disadvantaged than if you're a salaried worker.
Would that be, again, I think it,
it doesn't sound like you've got any research on that.
No, I think it really depends on the decision that any em,
the, the particular employer might take in terms
of supporting their, uh, employees to, uh,
attend jury service or, or, or not.
And you know, I would imagine there'd be a range of factors
that that come to bear as to, you know, the ability of,
of any particular organization, whether public service
or private sector to be able to, uh, to do that.
And just, sorry, one thing.
Are you aware of any of the big employers organizations, um,
or the manufacturers, those groups, are you aware of any
of them have got policies on this where they sort
of encouraged their members to No,
Unfortunately Not.
That would be possibly a piece of work for us, us
as a committee, but I just thought you may have done
that work to see, see if there's anything out there
We, we would certainly be interested
In. Yeah. Yeah. Just
to see whether there's any sort
of broad employer groups that say, well hold doing your,
your duty is, um, is, is to, uh, is
for justice anyway. Did you have,
I was gonna say it, it's odd that something
that's mandated in terms of the pay 21 years ago
hasn't been reviewed.
Is it, I mean, other than presumably success of governments,
just it's not, it's not broken, don't fix it.
IE there aren't, aren't
that many people complaining about it.
So let's not incur the extra cost.
Can you, is there, I mean, is it something
that's raised internally around the, the pay rents?
It is. I I think it's something that has been, uh,
looked at, uh, from time to time.
Um, I can't speak with any authority, uh, to that.
I understand, uh,
that there was at least some internal work, um,
to look at it, uh, in around 20, uh,
21 and 22.
Uh, I'm not sure, uh, where that, that went to, uh,
clearly it didn't, didn't progress.
I think you need to look at the, the, the,
the broader context in terms of, uh, priorities, um,
that are being progressed at any, any one time.
Yeah. Or at those, those times as to where that sits in the,
the scheme of, of those priorities.
Um, and I guess also the considerations
around the financial implications that, that come with that.
Uh, yeah.
Is it, um, the, the payments aren't taxable, are they?
Probably, I Don't know the answer to that.
We, we don't know the answer to that.
And the reason I'm gonna guess that they're not is
because if they were then essentially then,
then the DOJ would be in breach
of paying people less than minimum wage.
Well, unless it's, um, a reimbursement allowance,
it would be tax, wouldn't it? It it is
A contribution.
It is, it is not salary or wages.
It's not, it's to recognize the service.
It's not to replace, uh,
and pay them a wage for attendance.
And, uh, that goes to the fact that you're,
it is a civic duty.
It's part of participating in, uh, New Zealand society
and supporting, uh, a transparent, well-functioning,
trusted justice system
that the general public can have, uh, confidence in.
And of course, it, it's quite a, a significant role for a,
a general member of the public to be called, uh,
and sit on a, a jury, uh, at one's peers to to hear a, hear
A case. Yeah. Yeah.
Could you get back to us on,
could you find that if it's taxed?
'cause you'll obviously it would be taxed at source.
We, we can follow up. Alright.
Um, any other questions? Members?
It looks like we haven't got our submitter.
Can I just clarify one more thing?
I mean, I'm pretty sure you, you did say this in your
written report, but, um, the, there doesn't seem
to be any problem with getting sufficient numbers
of jurors under the current arrangement.
No, we, I think, um, we,
we mentioned kaiko court, um, possibly due
to the dynamics of a very small pool
of jurors in that catchment area.
Yeah. Um, other than that, no, we don't have issues, um,
in terms of getting sufficient numbers to run jury trials.
Okay. And you,
and you received, this goes back to my first question.
You received very few,
if any direct complaints about the level of, of,
of payment or reimbursement
In comparison to the overall number
of jurors that were suming? It's pretty small.
Yeah. Okay, cool. We,
We do get occasional correspondence from people, uh,
highlighting where they might have a particular challenge
with respect to, uh, the financial implications
of attending, uh, jury service
and the, the level of, of fees.
Uh, those are, uh, you know, that sort
of correspondence does come, come through. Uh, just
Would it be possible for us to, to, um, understand how,
how many of, how many applications
around financial hardship you receive, uh, in the context
of, of how many, uh, how many, um,
such applications you receive in total,
and then how many of those
hardship applications you accept, uh, and decline.
You can see what I'm getting at here is I'm just wondering
whether this is a potentially a problem.
Look, um, this is a solution looking for a problem.
I'm just trying to work out whether there
is actually currently a problem.
We don't, um, record specifically whether, um,
the application is declined because of the fees.
Right. We do, yeah.
Have the broad categories for occupational
or business health, um, or aged over 65.
Um, right. So I'm not sure whether we,
we can look into that further,
but I'm not sure whether we capture that exact
Data. Okay. I
mean, anecdotally most I hear from, um,
tradies single, um, sole operator tradies
that are usually the ones that, um, I hear from that, Hey,
I can't no take a week off.
It's an hour every hour
that I'm there, it's an hour I'm not earning.
So I'm just be, although it sounds like, um,
there's not a lot of research done.
We've had another petition we've been dealing with, um,
around, um, research on gender
and various other things around jurors.
I dunno if that's, um, your particular, um,
part, part of your business.
But, um, one thing that we were committee is quite amazed
that there wasn't a little bit more known about, um, the
Gender and ethnicity Demographics about jurors.
And this is a sort of an ended one too.
That'd be be a great PhD, wouldn't it?
Someone I'm sure the department's got plenty of money to,
to note to someone to come into a PhD.
Um, can I just clarify one point
earlier about your question?
Um, we refer in our submission
to the recent juror satisfaction survey.
Um, so that surveys, um, jurors
who have partaken in jury service or obviously like got, um,
Being selected Take the time, um, and
Been selected. Yes.
And
We didn't, uh, we don't seek feedback on the adequacy of,
um, j fees in that survey.
So I just wanted to clarify that.
Okay. That is more focused on, um, their experience
with the services and the facilities that we provide.
So a deliberate, was
that a deliberate decision when the
survey was being designed?
Was it, I'm not sure. I'm not sure.
I don't think we, we could say, is that survey, uh, updated
or changed from time to time?
Um, I believe it,
Its regulated. Believe,
yes. Mr. Willis?
No, I was just reflecting my eldest son,
the jury service not so long ago.
And apparently it was, he, he, I got a sense that he,
he really did get a sense of civic purpose in participating.
Mm-hmm. And he was under instruction not
to talk about the case, which was right and proper.
And he didn't. And he said it was a very difficult, um,
challenging case, but he, he really felt, he came out of
that feeling like he'd gained something
and it wasn't financial.
Alright, well, we'll we'll be reporting back.
I, I, we'll still anticipating discussion,
but it sounds like it's, uh, something
that doesn't need addressing has budget.
2000 and, uh, 26. Alright, thanks very much.
Very much.
Okay. No, we don't have, that's a first.
Oh, cheers. Thanks a lot.
Thanks for your work as public students too. Yeah.
Much appreciate you and
that's a fantastic shared entire combination.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair. Right? No, we have given, um, prior
to arriving you have leave to thank you two to question
and yeah, I don't have lots of questions,
but, um, I've, that came for me to be here.
So right now, are they ready? We don't wanna,
We've got the next people on.
Have we got them? Have we got them all on? Which
One at least.
And are they all, are they all zooms?
Are they all in Zoom today?
Um, they're almost, yes. They're
All Zoom. Oh,
the dog dogs New Zealander here. Some
People are gonna be Oh,
But chain dog will.
Well, okay, well I don't think if everyone's ready
to start and let's get underway
then four
30. I don't think we're gonna need that
Long. We can
we get them all on together?
Yeah, we'll see. Well,
Because we've got the same question for more.
It might be difficult on the
getting them all up might be a little
because there's gonna be a lot of moving. Well, we No,
No, but they're saying they're all on Zoom.
Well, can you, can you get them on a,
on Zoom as a sort of a panel?
So they're all, so you want,
You want, okay, so we've got the petitions here.
You want the petitioner and NPI
And Oh, the petitioner is on Zoom now
The petitions has been promoted.
NPIs here supposed to be, um,
on agenda thereafter.
No, look, I look, I think we'll do them in order
'cause I can just see this at the moment.
We've got Do you think it's gonna be doable
to have everybody up on a
Uh, we've only got NPI we have one.
Oh, they're the others aren't here anyway.
Oh, that's, oh, that's good. Alright. Thank you.
Now who do we have here? We, I'm
N-P-I-N-P-I.
Oh, right. You're MPI.
This is who's, did you shut the door when you left?
But it's entirely, well come to the table. Alright. Um, do
You want to have The petition? The
Fiona? Is it Yes, the Petitioners I think are online.
Yeah. Okay. Well let's, let's, okay. You come, come to here.
The petitioner is online. All online. Yep. So, alright.
Thank you. It, uh, took me a while
to catch up that I'm here.
Yeah. Alright, thank you. We've got, um, Ms.
Breen and Ms. Shorter, is that right?
Yes, that's correct. Can you hear us okay?
We can now. We'll just introduce ourselves.
Can you see us? Yes, you can.
I'm Greg O'Connor, chairman of the committee on my right.
Good. I'm Greg Fleming, uh, MP from mia.
Uh, hello. I am Paulo Garcia MP for New Lynn
And Kira Scott Willis Green Party MP based in party
meeting Listing mp.
Alright. And with us in the room here we have, um,
Fiona Duncan, um, from MPI.
So she'll be hearing, listening to your, um, submission.
And do we have someone from, from online? Online.
Gavin, Roma, Kia, Rachel boy here as well. Nice to see you.
Oh, sorry. My apologies. Yeah, they know me. Right, right.
For add to this.
Alright, so 10 minutes is yours.
Take your submission as read,
but obviously speak to the highlights
and, uh, leave time for questions would be good.
Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, we are chain dog awareness.
I'm Christine, and with me is Sarah
and I'm, I'm kind of reading this out.
Um, new Zealand's population of dogs is increasing
and rescue groups are drowning and cannot keep up.
Dogs can have two to three litters per year with five
to 16 pups per litter.
With average litter sizes at nine to 10 pups.
Dog numbers are growing at a faster rate than human numbers.
In May, 2020,
there were 851,000 dogs in New Zealand.
Per the companion animals report, 70%
of dogs were registered leaving 30% unregistered
with the majority of these 250,000 plus dogs
not being desexed.
Now in 2 0 2 5,
although no official statistics, we've been told
by animal control there would be one to 1.4 million dogs.
Meaning 30% of these unregistered dogs equates
to over 300,000 Essex dogs in New Zealand.
Auckland Council advised yesterday they have a pilot program
where they expect to desex 400 to 450 dogs across
a few 10 or 10 South Auckland suburbs.
This is great, but it's just a drop in the ocean.
At the heart of the problem is the failure
to address the root cause.
Desing. Without it uncontrolled dog populations lead
to a devastating cycle.
Dogs roaming, sometimes aggressive
and attacking puppies, abandon rescues pounds.
And the SPCA overwhelmed, we've all seen the news stories
and tragically too many dogs euthanized
because there is no other option in practice.
And that is Desex.
Auckland Council, as an example,
killed over 4,000 dogs in the last financial year.
That number is three
and a half times higher than three years earlier.
35,000 complaints were taken by Auckland Council
and the public made 80% more welfare complaints
about abandoned and mistreated dogs.
In the previous year,
mana Cow count pound killed 173 dogs in one week.
Recently they killed dogs three times a week
with other Auckland pounds killing once to twice a week.
So a constant ongoing large scale euthanasia of healthy dogs
due to the dog population being out of control,
stopping unwanted litters
before they start through mandatory sexing,
we stop the cycle of unwanted puppies
and thousands of dogs being killed.
This is backed by clear evidence
and other countries are demonstrating the way forward.
Some have attempted to blame the current COVID crisis
or the current crisis on COVID, but this is not accurate.
The overpopulation issue predates the pandemic
and has been building for years.
What we are seeing now as a result
of long term under investment in des sexing programs
and a lack of enforceable re legislation.
There's been significant demographic change in New Zealand
over the last 25 years since chain dog awareness began.
In many communities, there is strong resistance
to des sexing male dogs,
and the bulk of these families just love having puppies.
There are cultural and social beliefs
that education alone won't shift.
And third generational.
Now, uh, we wanna acknowledge
and thank the other submitters.
Ministry for primary industries acknowledges the benefits
des sexing can provide dogs, owners and communities.
And mandatory des sexing of dogs would reduce the number
of unwanted companion animals.
The SPCA supports mandatory des dissecting as an urgent
and practical step to reduce the burden on themselves.
Pounds and rescues.
The unregulated and irresponsible breeding
of dogs are significant welfare impacts contributing
to overpopulation and community nuisance
and danger Title regulation through breeder licensing
and an updated code of welfare for dogs is needed.
Other countries such as Australia
and the UK have implemented,
implemented successful regulations.
As such, the New Zealand Veterinary Association recognizes
the importance of des sexing dogs not intended
for breeding dogs.
New Zealand agrees with the substance of our petition
and that New Zealand has high levels of unwanted, dumped,
abandoned, and abused dogs,
and their lit of papas leading to animal welfare issues.
They identify the problem is irresponsible dog ownership
and agree with implementing a breeder licensing program.
Mandatory sexing reduces the huge number
of dog attacks and makes our communities safer.
As an example, between January
and the 22nd of May this year, 2 0 2 5
Auckland Council received 6,167 reports
of roaming dogs and impounded 2,460 dogs.
The number of dog crack attacks across Auckland continues
to arise with 3000 attacks on people in animals
reported in 2024 alone.
The trauma to those attacked
and the a CC costs continue to soar.
For example, in 2021, the a CC costs
for dog related injuries were 23.4 million.
In May, 2024,
Auckland Council announced there were 27,000
dog related injuries reported every year in New Zealand
with just under 3000 of those to the babies
and children under 14 years of age.
As an example, in Victoria
and Australia, annual city council's free cat sterilization
program led to an 82% reduction in euthanasia
and a 66% decrease in empowerments Over eight years.
A public des sexing fund needs to be established
with mobile des sexing units being set up in low
socioeconomic suburbs when many have little
or no access to their own transport.
The majority of dogs in low socioeconomic environments live
outside, not allowed inside,
let alone in a vehicle if there is one to go to.
A vet mandatory de sexing helps councils better arrange
their resources by reducing the exhausting cycle
of impounds and euthanasias.
Uh, it is better to desex dogs than
to keep killing them, to reduce the numbers.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you very much.
Um, just in your research, how many un what percentage
of dogs are unregistered?
Um, did you pick that up
because I mean, obviously it's gonna be related to, um,
once they're D six, they would have to be re-registered,
the two would have to go alongside each other.
Would that be fair enough to summation?
That's right. Well, at the moment we are saying
that there are one to 1.4 million dogs,
um, in New Zealand.
Um,
30% And 30%
weed state are are unregistered. 30% of
These, yeah, 30%.
And the majority of unregistered dogs are not desexed.
Alright. And and, and by making this mandatory,
are you going to capture the currently unregistered dogs?
Because clearly unregistered means that the people are
outside any system anyway, where they're gonna be captured.
Would that be a fair it?
Um, So, so what the very, the very dogs we need
to be desexed will probably be the hardest
to get to.
Would that again be a fair enough summation? Yeah.
Basically every dog in New Zealand should be desexed
because the dog population, not breeders.
Yeah, breeders, registered breeders.
But a lot of the dog population's just out of control.
Every pound, every SPCA, every rescue,
whether it's chain dog awareness, saving hope, who ha
every rescuer was drowning on social media and Facebook.
There's constantly people, I've got puppies,
I've got puppies, free puppies,
and of course these puppies are being handed out in low
socioeconomic environments.
Children are bringing them home from the playground.
Between Christine
and I as an example,
we get over 600 messages every day on text or messenger
and the number of people coming to us for help
and we just one rescue, it's never ending.
It's just, it's out of control.
Many of the dogs who are out roaming picked up
by animal control, if the owners actually do want the dogs
back, it would be good to have the councils legislate
that these dogs must be decepted.
And of course, with councils involved,
they would be registering them.
They'd be reporting from the public, my neighbor's dog.
That's how a lot of this, the bulk of this happens,
a lot of my neighbor's dog.
So we are constantly given new addresses. Alright.
New given new addresses. Yeah.
Members, any Questions? Yes. Yeah, a quick question.
So one, I'd just um, be keen to come back if possible
to Greg's question, which is, uh,
I've got real sympathy for what you are asking.
I've just got real trouble trying to work out how,
how it's actually going to be effective.
And to that extent, are we, uh, is, is,
is is mandatory des sexing
actually the best way to address the problem.
But before we come back to that, can I just, the stats
that you are, that you are, um,
that you are quoting are very different from
what the New Zealand Veterinary Association is stating.
And what we will be, we'll be coming to them soon.
So I guess you guys will stay online, can hear them.
I'm just keen to understand
that there's the significant discrepancy.
But you are saying in summary, you are saying
that the dog population's outta
control and it's just exploding.
They're saying no, it's actually been stable now
for quite a number of years.
So those two things are irreconcilable
so keen to understand those.
But, but just to get back to, um, yeah, that, that, that,
that first question that, that Greg asks, um,
'cause when he asked the questions that, um, the, you, you,
you looked flummox for a moment
and then you went back to talk about the, the
how big the problem is again.
Can Greg please ask his question again?
Just so we fully understand.
Oh, I was just saying that you, you, I think you said 30%
of dogs are unregistered, that's the problem area.
Would that be fair enough to say and and hard to reach area
and without them being registered, the leverage
Is, how are we gonna desex
them if they're not even registered?
There's little leverage in the area anyway.
Yeah, the majority, um,
Christine set up chain dog awareness 25 years ago.
The majority of unregistered dogs
were not desexed.
And the majority of the unregistered dogs tend
to be in low socioeconomic environments.
Um, a lot of people live in government housing.
Um, yeah,
Yeah, yeah. No, I understand.
Again,
I understand the problem just working out how,
how we're gonna address that
because if they, if they're already unregistered, then,
then essentially by bringing in another requirement,
we're just gonna make the dogs twice illegal
Then The owners.
Yep. Um, any thoughts?
Alright, look, members, we're sort of getting, um,
near the end of our time, is there any other questions
or comments any while we've got nothing else back from us?
But look, I, I think, um, you've certainly,
we've now got some presentations, which you're quite welcome
to remain online and listen to, um, which we try to get,
um, a few every viewpoint we can of a problem
and we will then subsequently report back, hopefully
with some recommendations around this.
So thank you very much. Um,
it's the most interesting committee that we all sit on
because we hear problems from all sorts of angles.
So, um, thank you for bringing this one to us. Yeah, thank
You. You, thank you.
Thank you.
And, uh, we'll now go, um, to the ministry, um,
through Ms. Duncan and Mr. Oma is there.
So Mr. Mr who's looking a bit like
he's shown us his photos.
Great, great, great art on. Good, Kevin. Good art,
While it looks like you, anyway.
Um, KDA, I'm Fiona Duncan.
I'm the director of regulatory systems policy at the
Ministry for Primary Industry.
So within my range of work, uh, animal welfare
policies included, and I have Gavin here
with me now, finally on screen. Oh,
Gavin, We,
We like your art, Who is our manager, sorry,
brand new laptop, who is our manager
of animal welfare policy.
So we can, we can provide any responses or,
or answer any questions you have in
that animal welfare space.
So as you know, there are two mainly pieces
of legislation involved
with the management of dogs in New Zealand.
So the Dog Control Act mostly delivered by local government
and the Animal Welfare Act.
Um, under the Animal Welfare Act, there's the code
of welfare for dogs that, um,
that we have some responsibility for.
So the purpose of the Dog Control Act is to provide control
for got dogs, that's where all the registration occurs.
And limit damage caused by dogs to either property,
which includes animals
or people rather than improving the welfare of the animals
or the all population control.
So they don't have a population control purpose.
And the purpose of the Animal Welfare Act is to ensure
that the owners of animals
and persons in charge of animals attend properly
to the welfare of those animals
and to ensure physical health
and behavioral needs of an animal are met by the owner
or in person in charge of that animal.
Um, the code of welfare for dogs acknowledges the benefits
of des sexing dogs
and, um, the benefits that it provides for dogs,
dog owners and the communities.
And it includes a recommended best practice that says
dogs are not intended for breeding dogs, not intended
for breeding, should be desexed before puberty.
So it's, it's in the code of welfare
as a recommended best practice.
As you've rightly identified, the communities that we're
often talking about possibly are not following all
of the code of welfare, particularly
the benefits of des sexing dogs.
And we acknowledge this, do outweigh the negatives
and include desexed animals live significantly longer
than those that are not.
The removal of hormonal influences can contribute to
that can contribute to inter dog aggression
and roaming as a benefit and the reduction
or elimination of diseases, including infections in cancers
of the reproductive system.
So Desex has all of those benefits,
but it does not in and of itself constitute a welfare issue.
So Des sexing doesn't constitute a welfare issue in
and of itself under the current legislation,
under the current legislation.
And nor is it considered necessary to meet physical health
and behavioral needs of an animal.
So it doesn't, as it's currently drafted, uh,
it doesn't enable NPI to consider population control
to improve welfare outcomes for animals.
So it's about, it's very much about the needs
of an individual animal rather than the impact
of population control on wider welfare benefits.
A change to this approach
to facilitate population management through de dissecting
of pet dogs would either require a change of an act
or a new piece of legislation specific to dogs
or an an animal management framework
that was distinct from animal welfare.
So, um, it's probably some work for us in DIA
to have to do on that.
Um, so such a proposal would've,
would require appropriate consultation
and have to go through the legislative development process,
hidden legislative priority, all
of those kind of things as you know.
Um, and we'd be wanting to, uh, going through that process
identify quite wide range in community
support for such an approach.
I was, those were the, that sort
of basically summarizes I think the submission we made
to the committee, but, um, I'm happy to take any questions
and if I don't know the answer, Gavin probably will.
So. Alright.
So members Rachel, um, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you very much, um,
for coming along, um, to submit.
I do have a couple of questions.
Um, the, I guess my question would be in terms
of updating legislation, so obviously, um,
under section 20 of the act, um,
councils can only require des sexing
of a dog when it's been, hasn't been under control.
Dog Control Act. Yes. Dog control. Yeah.
So if they, so for example, Auckland Councils by law,
well the updated policy they're putting in place would,
would allow for mandatory des sexing of a dog
after one instance
of being not being under control, which is a low number.
So that essentially means if they've picked up a dog,
it's been roaming, they'll be able to desex it
before returning it.
Um, but I guess my question is, could that piece
of the act not be extended a little bit like
what happens in CAT bylaws whereby, um,
councils can put in place a CAT bylaw
that requires des sexing
of the cat within a certain timeframe.
Could you not just update section 20 K
of the Dog Control Act potentially?
Yeah. That's an act that is, um, managed
by Department of Internal Affairs.
Yes. Yeah. So I mean, we, we, we, I think are, are likely
to be asked to, given that the magnitude of the issue,
I suspect we are likely to be asked to do some work
with DIA Yeah.
On wider issues around dogs.
Because if you look at, sorry, just to, uh, um,
if you look at the objects of, um, the Dog Control Act,
so not looking through the Animal Welfare Act, looking
specifically through the Dog Control Act, uh, the objects,
um, a three is, um, to make better provision for the care
and control of dogs by imposing on the owners
of dogs obligations designed to ensure
that dogs do not cause a nuisance to any person
and do not injure and danger
or cause distress to any person.
And there's very clear evidence that a,
that a nonsex male dog, for example, it's far more likely
to be aggressive, far more likely to roam, far more likely
to escape, far more likely to bite somebody. So you
Say a nonsex A nonsex male dog for example, what
Do you call them? Intact?
Uh, in Yeah, in entire or intact in, yeah, dog. Okay.
Um, and so, so I would've thought that a update
of the dog control section 20 K, the Dog Control Act
to essentially give council more tools
to implement a bylaw requiring desex under a lot more like a
wider range of circumstances, um,
or even a blanket requirement.
That would be totally in my reading of the act.
That would be, um, that that would be consistent
with the objects of the Dog Control Act.
Yes. That would be my instinct as well. Yeah.
But I would need to defer
to my DIA colleagues on it. Right? Yeah,
Yeah. And you're saying that
could be done through
what Secondary legislation or just actually
Would be amendment to the document?
So we would need it, we would need
legislative change, yes.
Yeah, yeah. Right.
Ah, from moment you got me half thought direct.
So the councils are enforcing this.
They use the Dog Control Act. Yes.
So, and, and, and all their
different councils are different rules.
Yeah. But they essentially,
they're using the Dog Control Act.
They, they're do, they're making their
rules under the Dog Control
Act. Right. Okay.
And that's the second legislation.
No, no, no. It's, there's two pieces
of legislation, right.
So you've got animal welfare,
which is about animal welfare issue.
Yeah. And then you've got the dog, the Dog Control Act,
which is about managing do populations.
So if the committee did decide
that we would recommend this,
we would be recommending changes to the
Dog if you would recommend it.
You, you, if you were following that path, it would be
to the Dog Control Act, right? That
Was, Yeah. Yeah. So
the, the
Review of the Dog Control Act be conducted,
It would be undertaken by the
Department of Internal Affairs.
So it would be the Minister for Local Government
that would need to be the sponsor of that.
Okay. Alright. Members, any other questions?
I mean, I'm hearing, if I'm hearing you correctly,
I'm gonna realize you've gotta be careful about this in
terms of what your position is as well.
But through both this,
through both your written submission here,
you sound like you'd be in, in favor
of some kind of, some kind of change.
I mean, I think as, as we've flagged here, I think we
absolutely see the wealthy benefits.
So, um, we're not wanting to sort of suggest it's not a,
it's not a good thing to do.
And the code of PR code of Welfare
recommends des sexing dogs that are not used for breeding.
So, um, we, we just don't have the capacity
to do it under the Animal Welfare Act without a
legislative change in that direction.
Probably the easier legislative change,
and I mean, I can't, you know,
would be under the Dog control act.
We've had, we've had a very similar petition came
to the committee, I think last year around, um,
mandatory des dissecting for cats.
Mm-hmm. That's more difficult
because there isn't any CAT legislation
And there's no registration either.
That's right. Because the other thing I was gonna say is,
'cause the councils my council, actually, you get a, um,
presumably most, do you get a reduction in your
registration fee for your dog?
For your dog? They are.
If it's, so that's Yeah,
But that's just a local that's,
that's nothing under the act. They don't Yeah.
But councils can, and their bylaws require desing of cats.
I cats requiring,
but they can't require a blanket, um, desing of dogs.
So that's where there is a difference in, say that again.
So cats can put 'em, um, do, sorry.
Councils can do bylaws requiring des
sexing of cats under
What legislation? I can't
recall. They do, but
they don't have a legislation.
I think they can do it because they don't have have a cat
law That's so, so, so Nelson
and Tasmine had just done it helpfully with different, um,
timeframes, which makes, you know,
which is a bit annoying, but, so
You say Nelson have done it.
Nelson and Tasman have just put in place bylaws
that require desex of cats, but they can't do it.
They have a blanket requiring, right.
Like all cats must be desexed by a certain age.
One is six months, once nine months.
But for dogs, you can't do that.
The only thing you can do under the dog control ad is if the
dog has been, has not been under control, you have to have
that in your, in your policy
and you have to stipulate the number
of times it hasn't been under control.
So if we, um, basically if we were to get rid
of the Dog Control Act, they could do it
Right? You just, you
just amend that.
Yeah, amend or that's useful.
That, that's, um, for that, that might be,
we might get someone to get to that.
That's already been done in the council.
So that's very useful. Thank you. Look, thank you very much.
No problem. Useful and, uh, informative.
Now we got our next, um, submitters here.
Being the SBCA.
You must. Yes. You're welcome.
Yeah, we're in, we're in public.
We're in public at the moment, so quite
Keen to hear the Formal
Submission, so I can
Alright, Dr. Vaughn, we have Dr. Vaughn.
Thank you. Welcome. Have you been online watching?
So you've seen Eric? Yes,
I have. Very
well. So we can go straight into it.
Take your submission as read,
but very interested to, uh, hear from you.
Super. So, um, as you said, I've Dr. Allison Vaughn
and I'm a scientific officer with SPCA
and here to talk to you today about our position on the
petition to mandate the des sectioning
of Dogs in New Zealand except registered breeders.
And we'd first like to thank the petitioners Christine
and Sarah from Chain Dog Awareness
for raising this important issue.
And we would tend to agree with them
that there is an urgent need
to address the irresponsible breeding
of companion animals in New Zealand.
The unregulated and irresponsible breeding
of dogs has significant welfare impacts.
Uh, it contributes to overpopulation of unwanted animals
and exacerbates community and nuisance and danger.
It also places pressure on, uh, rescues
and animal welfare organizations like ourselves.
And so Des Sexing is an important piece of this puzzle, um,
with the most impact
through targeting irresponsible breeders,
shelter populations,
and as was just discussed, roaming dogs.
Um, so rescues, animal shelters
and cancel pans all play a critical role in population
control by des sexing dogs before rehoming
and also dogs impounded for repeated roaming.
Um, so some councils do this, some councils don't.
Uh, we strongly support des sexing
and we broadly support the intent
of the petition in addressing the issue.
Um, but mandatory des sectioning is a more nuanced
conversation than mandatory de section of cats,
which was raised also.
Um, and that's partly
because, uh, dogs given a wide variety of, uh,
breeds and shapes and sizes,
it means it's really complicated in setting a specific age
for mandatory des sexing.
Whereas for cats it's relatively straightforwards.
Um, also in terms of availability
and awareness of veterinarians, um,
the research is a little bit more, um, nuanced around dogs
and that can lead to hesitations.
Some veterinarians may not wish to desex dogs
until they reach ages such as 18 months even.
Um, and also, uh, which was discussed
by Christine availability, uh, the financial
and accessibility barriers.
So some people don't get their dogs desexed
because there's no vet in their area, they can't travel
or they can't afford it.
Um, so, uh, taking a a enforcement, uh, approach
to these people are already vulnerable,
might be the best approach.
And also desex rates are already quite
high in dogs in New Zealand.
Um, so it's companion Animals.
New Zealand report shows 85%
of dogs in New Zealand are sexed.
Um, we dunno what age they were. Sorry. Yeah,
Sorry Allison, can you say that again?
Did you say that 85% of 85%
of dogs in New Zealand are sexed? Yeah.
Registered dogs or dogs? 85% of registered dogs.
Dogs. So the Companion Animals New Zealand, um,
survey doesn't distinguish between the two,
but what we would say is it, we don't know at
what age earth they've already had litters.
So there is, um, a tradition where some people like
to have their dog have one litter before Desex.
So 85% of all dogs in New Zealand registered
and unregistered are are a D six
Based on the best available information we have.
So, um, that's the most recent companion Animals
New Zealand survey.
Wow. It's still a lot. Thank
You. Well that's still numbers
wise,
still a lot that aren't Yeah.
Yeah. But it sounds like the, um, the, the, the what,
what's been requested suddenly for the first time
to me sounds like it's achievable.
Like I I was, I mean 15% of Yeah.
Yeah, because there's a lot more than what I was imagining,
which is more like 50%.
Yeah.
Anyway, carry on.
Well Mr. Fleming continue to express his ma
Um, so while we do support des sexing
and all different tools to um, achieve this,
especially in these populations where there's a risk
that they can contribute to, um, unwanted animals, um,
we have also proposed a nurse submission alterna.
Um, I suspect
with this particular issue there's no one silver bullet.
And so what we've put forward in our submission is several,
um, alternative approaches that we have previously, um,
proposed, uh, and discussed with MPI
and we believe that a combination
of these approaches would be the most effective in
addressing issues associated
with the irresponsible breeding of dogs.
Um, so these are a code of welfare
updating the code of welfare for dogs.
So the intent of codes of welfare is they're designed
to be flexible and to be kept up to date with research
and be updated at least every 10 years.
But the code of welfare for dogs is over 15 years old.
So SPCA had, uh, did previously form an agreement with NPI
and naac that we would lead updating the code of welfare
for dogs on the condition
that would be accepted into naac work plan.
So we did complete the required, um, redraft, um, along
with seven other organizations
or as part of seven organizations.
And we also completed the required consultation
with representatives of people likely to be affected
by the code and got feedback from over 400 organizations
and individuals.
And that updated proposed draft
and the accompanying report, which summarizes the research,
was passed to NAAC for consideration in October, 2023.
And the current code of welfare
for dogs only has one minimum standard
as specific to breeding.
Whereas the proposed draft code introduces several proposed
minimum standards, which aimed set clear expectations
for dog breeding, such as maximum number
of litters across female dogs' lifetime minimum maximum age
for breeding and socialization and care for puppies.
So we are very keen, um, there's been a lot
of work already done on that.
It would be great to see that progressed.
Um, also regulations both to address prolonged confinement
of dogs but also breed regulations.
So that's something that we've put forward, um,
several years ago and are happy to provide, um, research
and support to, to progress.
Um, so breed regulations would help to address some
of the things our inspectors see on a daily basis.
So when we see issues with breeders,
they fall into two camps.
Either it's irresponsible as their backyard breeding
where there's may be an accident, unintended breedings
or it's these very big large scale uh, breeding operations
where animals may be bred from a very young age, um, very,
very frequently and kept in unsuitable conditions.
Um, but with the current legislation it's a bit tricky in,
in all cases for us to intervene
and regulations addressing companion
animal breeding would be really helpful.
Uh, and the other piece which I think Christine mentioned
was breeder licensing.
We're not talking about reinventing the wheel here.
Many different countries have breeder licensing.
Um, so for example in the uk, England, Wales
and also Scotland have such a system for cats, dogs
and in Scotland also rabbits.
And that's proven very effective.
And then the other point I suppose, um, relating back
to conversations just
before I joined, uh,
it would be really great if we had guidance um,
for cancels on des sexing roaming dogs
where they're repeatedly roaming and also des sexing dogs
before they adopt the mat.
If we're adopting out und dex dogs, we're just uh, uh,
continuing the issue.
So with that I will hand over for questions
Just on that. Uh, every
rescue dog is desexed,
Uh, S-P-C-A-D sixes, all of our dogs,
unless there vet provides advice
that they should defer desing
and there may be different indirect reasons for
that based on the individual animal.
Alright, Thank you. But not all councils are desing
dogs before they adopt them adult dogs.
Alright, um, Greg Fleming and then Roach would work.
Can I just ask about the cost
and the complexity of desex in procedures, uh,
the vet capacity in New Zealand for that
and um, what is the cost of euthanasia?
Uh, the costs really vary depending on the different
veterinarians, uh, veterinary practices across the country
and I wouldn't be able to give you a set figure for that.
Um, but what are the
SC context?
What does it cost on the, It depends which area
we're we're operating in.
So most of our centers don't have in-house veterinarians.
We rely on external veterinarians for most of our outreach.
Okay. Um, but in terms of the veterinary capacity, uh,
that is a challenge.
So we do have ave shortage here in New Zealand.
So that would be something to consider if you were
to be considering um, bringing in mandatory desex
and if there was a deadline, uh,
whether there's capacity within the vet
population to, to meet that.
Okay. And so just that last one,
what was the um, the cost?
'cause the SPCA does the majority of euthanasia, isn't it?
What's the cost of euthanasia?
Uh, so we mostly rely on external veterinary practices
so each of them will set their own prices.
Um, but I can uh, speak to our operation staff
and see if I can get you an estimate.
Thank you Rachel. Boy. Hi Alison, nice to see you.
Um, and thank you so much for uh,
a really comprehensive um, submission.
I was just interested um, uh, right at the front actually.
And you've talked about it in your submission about other
countries putting in place, you know,
other options like the regulations for breeders.
Um, and I'm just interested, is there good data
showing, I guess a reduction in the dog population
or reduction in the kinds
of issues we've been seeing in New Zealand in those
countries like before and after those changes were made?
Because I think it would be quite useful to say, okay,
can we look at one of those countries
or a couple of those countries,
what were the particular issues that we're presenting?
Did they have a high proportion of roaming dogs?
Those kinds of things. Like what we are seeing
then implemented the some changes
and then did they see some improvements?
So it'd be quite useful if we could get,
I don't know if you're able to provide some more
of the background for those examples,
but you kind of get what I'm saying right, like, like
how much of an issue was it
and then how much of an improvement was,
was seen after the changes?
Yeah. So we can definitely reach out
to our counterparts in the UK to
to see about source that information.
One of the challenges is of course
that many things happen concurrently.
So it would be difficult to say
what would be the main causal factor.
Um, unlike say something like looking at with cat, uh,
des sexing going cancel by cancel where you may be able
to look at before and after.
Um, while the national events remain roughly the same.
Um, but we can definitely look into that data.
Um, but you know, they're facing similar concerns
and that's why there was so, uh, much political will
to do something about it there
because they're facing the same challenges.
Yeah because in Australia, oh
Just, sorry, we'll just running over time
now, so thank you.
I can talk to you fine. It's all good.
Alright, look, thanks um, very much.
Sorry we're just having a little
bit of time constraint here.
So, um, but thank you very much, uh, again, excellent.
Um, certainly um, contribution
and adding considerably to the our knowledge.
Thanks very
Much. We're
now going on New Zealand Veterinary Association.
Couple more lines, but dogs NZ just in the process of
Joining. Alright, we'll
go to dogs. NZ sorry.
So they're not doing quite yet,
but uh, they said that they'll be driven momentarily.
Oh right, okay. Well I needin have cut you off
after all Rachel, so,
so weever, one of them arrives first. We'll,
We'll let you know.
Oh look, you're welcome to sit
at the table here if you'd like.
Oh, no, no, it's fine. It's
Just interesting to kind Of, yeah.
Here we with should I, I, um,
remove cheaper
Than I?
No, she, she's welcome to stay.
Oh, 10 weeks.
Oh, sorry. She's still there. She's still there.
Oh no, Rachel, while we're waiting Alright,
we can ask, ask that question.
Okay. While, while you're back, we've just got,
we're just waiting for our next two.
I've been un cut off. I've been uncut off.
I was just gonna ask about Australia
'cause there are a couple of states
that have done mandatory des sexing, haven't they?
And I think, 'cause I totally take the point that,
and I'll be asking this of the vets when they come on about
the, the challenge around age ranges
that obviously if you've got a large dog off,
often it's thought to do it a bit later.
So I guess I'm just wondering, if you were to have a
mandatory des sexing role, could you not put in place, um,
an exemption that allowed a vet
to determine a different date for health reasons?
So if it was a large dog
or the vet thought waiting was the appropriate thing to do,
you could then have an exemption for that dog.
Yeah, and that's certainly
what we put in our submission was
that we would support mandatorys sexing if there was a,
a provision to allow for written note from a vet
to defer des sexing if, if it was medically necessary.
Okay. Alright.
Talk among ourselves. So we waiting for any,
any more questions for SBCA?
Oh, I was just gonna say, um, um, but
Just, um, one, one question I was just gonna ask you,
you heard our, um,
petitioners talking about the large number, um, of,
um, unregistered dogs.
Is that your experience?
Would you, is is that, would you say that's
your understanding of the number of unregistered dogs?
I think we base are, are, uh, the number
or the population of New Zealand dogs on the latest
companion animals New Zealand report,
which came out last year, um, which is a bit lower than, um,
what was discussed by Christine and Sarah.
I think it's really difficult when we get into the
percentage of, or the number of unregistered dogs
'cause by their very nature they're not being counted.
Yeah. So presumably in your,
in your survey you're trying to as ascertain that. Yeah,
No, I was just going to say Mr.
Chair, that, um, well done to the SBCA
because you've launched today the new tool, the new portal
with Auckland Council to desex a whole lot
of dogs in Auckland.
So, um, probably something that the committee, um,
should know about that is actually a campaign or today.
So well done.
Thank you very much. Appreciate
That. Okay. Thanks
for flexibility.
Um, Allison, and we've now got dogs in
New Zealand, not in person.
They're
right.
We've got you here.
Hello? Yes, we've got you.
Well, the three of you in a round, a rather large table,
so, all
Look, we'll, we'll get straight into this.
Um, you just, uh, Greg O'Connor, the chair, um,
and if you can just, um, take your submission as read,
but of course, um, you, you won't have heard the previous,
um, any of the previous submissions, presumably.
No, we came in just in the last few minutes.
Oh, okay. Right. So, um, we've just had the
petitioners obviously from chain dog Awareness, ministry
of M-P-I-S-P-C-A, um, and now yourselves.
So, um, take us away.
Right, well first of all, uh, good afternoon everyone,
and to special afternoon to you, Mr. O'Connor.
You possibly haven't recognized me yet.
My name's Owen Dance,
Ah, President's elect and, um,
and a past president of Dogs New Zealand,
which is the trading name of the New Zealand Kennel Club.
I do, Owen. Yes. How can I, how can I forget you?
Good to see you again. My first sergeant,
Sorry. One
of my first sergeants.
Ah, yes. The memories.
Anyway, I'd like to, uh, acknowledge the submission
that the SPCA made and congratulate them on it.
Um, we thought it was excellent and we thoroughly endorse it
and I'd just like to place that on record.
We are the administrative body
for most canine sport in New Zealand,
and we maintain registries of all pedigree dogs
and all dogs pedigree
or mixed breed that are used for our activity based sports,
which are principally agility
and obedience, uh, among some other, um, minority ones.
We are dedicated to promoting good breeding
and good standards and canine health and welfare.
And we believe in controlled breeding by people who know
what they're doing and who, um, trick their dogs well
and make sure that they pass them on by sale, uh,
or gifting to people who will also treat them well.
Uh, we believe dogs should be bred from only if they're
good, healthy examples of their breeds,
and if they're going to contribute to the showing
or sporting activity for which their breeder has bred them.
Uh, any dog that doesn't measure up
or that is surplus to requirements,
we believe should be desexed.
Um, and any dog, any b***h at the end
of her breeding life should be desexed.
Um, and we have very strict codes of ethics around breeding
that define when the end of a breeding life is reached
and what conditions should be maintained.
Now, the Sbca has already made the point in their submission
that most, uh, dog owners, most pet owners
get their dogs desexed anyway.
So we are, we are talking in this context, I believe,
about the other element of the dog owning community
that engages un an unsatisfactory
behavior, uh, of their dogs.
And, um, it's probably not amenable
to the software options like education, uh,
and such like approaches to try to influence their behavior.
Uh, I must make the point, uh,
before I pass on from Desex that
it is a very important issue
that the SPCA has raised when they talk about
the age at which a dog is D six,
because there are potential negative health implications
for dogs if they're D six too early.
And that depends on the, the age of the dog
and the breed and the size.
So we would respectfully suggest that if, um,
any legislation to introduce mandatory desex is considered,
uh, there should be care taken to make sure
that it contains rather than a blanket provision
that all dogs will be desexed at whatever time, uh, words
to the effect that the timing
of the operation should be subject to the, uh,
opinion of a veterinarian.
And that would provide the latitude
to breed the larger dogs later than you would want
to breed the, uh, to, to breed,
to desex the larger dogs later than you would want
to desex the smaller ones.
Now, we also favor the licensing of breeders
as proposed, uh, in other submissions.
Uh, we would argue that this enables the identification
of breeders whose breeding goes beyond,
um, reasonable limits.
It attracts attention to them and they can be monitored
and perhaps their behavior corrected.
Uh, we have licensing registration, in fact, of all
of our members who breed.
Uh, we've been maintaining those records since 1886,
and we are in a position to know
how many litters are given breeder is producing in a year.
And in the event that one, um, appears
to be drifting towards bad practices
or excess breeding, we're in a position to, uh, step in and,
and take some steps to correct them.
Uh, although it's limited for,
it's difficult for them to do that.
Now, given that our code of conduct, which is enforceable
and fines exist for breaches, um, our code
of ethics limits the number of progeny they can produce
and enables us to, um, to monitor it.
So it be difficult to replicate
that across society at large, um,
because we actually track the pups they sell too, uh,
which I, I doubt you would want to do with, um, for example,
farmers or, um,
or just citizens who want
to breed a few litters from their dog spot.
But the registration itself of the breed
and I would suggest is an important first step
to getting visibility of how many breeders there are
or what they're doing, and would provide the disincentive
to people who don't have any business breeding dogs
to discourage them from doing so.
Now, the question of enforcement
is usually addressed last because it's not fashionable
or popular, but we were an expert on that, Mr.
Darts. So I was gonna say, you
and I know that there are people out there
who are not gonna go to education classes
to improve their behavior.
Um, and the harder you try to get them there,
the more they'll laugh at you and thumb their noses.
So when such people appear, there has to be a big stick.
So dogs, New Zealand favors enforcement
and enforcement that is, uh, strictly enforced
and is followed up on and entails meaningful penalties.
Now, in saying that, I acknowledge
that currently the question of who actually would do this
exists, and it's, it's a thorny one.
I'm not suggesting dogs New Zealand would want to do it,
but we are not equipped to, and it's, uh, it's not
for us to try to do that.
Probably the SPCA, possibly the police,
although as we know the police priority is with, um,
crimes against people or, or property
and, um, animal welfare falls into that gray zone
where certainly during my 26 years in the job,
most cops would say, well, go and see the SPCA.
We are too busy catching Crocs, but someone has to do it.
And I guess the SPCA is probably the, the primary, um,
candidate for the role,
but they need funding, they need the resourcing.
There are not enough animal inspectors,
and I suggest they don't have enough powers.
I, I throw that comment out there so
that it goes on the record, um, trying to find a polite way
of saying if the government wants it done,
the government's gonna have to find the money
to let someone do it and fund them to do it.
And that's really all I wanted to say verbally, just to, uh,
follow up on what's in our written submission.
So I've said my piece
and I'm, uh, pleased to answer any questions you may have.
Alright, thank you J just with the, so you're really, um,
intertwining the registration of owners with the desing
of dogs that you see the two as running parallel.
Um, the, you talked about the, the farmer
who has a couple of litters maybe in every couple of years,
or would they come under a regime of, um,
the registration of only being a licensed breeder?
I would suggest they should
because, um, from my understanding of,
of dogs in, in agriculture, which I admit
as a townie is not great,
but I think there are some farmers with dogs
who get involved in trying to supply other farmers with dogs
or get involved in, um, um, what do they call it, the
shoe herding thing on the hillside, you know, um,
who may wish to, to engage in breeding for that purpose.
And then there are the others who are happy to go
and buy pups when they need them.
So for those others,
and I, I expect they would be the great majority.
Um, there's no necessity for them to breed.
Uh, it's something they might do if,
if Maud comes into season and,
and Pete's looking pretty robust this year,
maybe they'd make nice pups.
Well, I see no harm in putting in place a regime
that discourages that
and says to such farmers, no, you know
that Dave down at the pub is a licensed breeder.
You need to go and see him if you want pups.
Alright, thank you. Yeah. Um, boy,
Um, thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you Owen for your submission.
Um, Rachel Ack here, um,
I'm just interested in the conversation around, um,
the age at which a dog is desexed
and something I'll, if, if we do hear from, um, the NZ
Vet Association, I'll be asking them,
but my understanding, particularly
around large dogs is it's more a concern
for pure bred dogs than say, a mixed breed dog.
That it tends to be large dogs that, um, you know,
have, for example, a higher, um, likelihood
of getting things like hip dysplasia
or arthritis, um, those types of, um, issues
that delaying the dys dissecting can be helpful
for those dogs, but that's more
for the pure bred dogs rather than mixed breed
that have often like bred out breeding some
of the kind of issues that a pure bred dog might've got.
A question. I've got a question, so I'm just interested.
Yeah, that's, that's my question.
So I'm just interested if that's something that
you've got advice on
around purebred versus mixed breed dogs?
Well, I, I'm Nove, uh,
and I'm aware that this debate about mixed breed and,
and pedigree dogs is quite contentious in some circles.
But I would argue that while there's no doubt that
a pedigree dog is predictably more likely
to get certain afflictions than a mixed breed dog,
let me make the comparison with human beings, it's a fact
that multiple sclerosis occurs proportionately more
among Scandinavians
and Scots than among people of every other race.
So it doesn't mean that it's reasonable to expect
that every Swede or every scot you meet is going to have ms.
You just know that if you draw the, the, the picture wide,
you can reasonably suppose
that if you have 10,000 Swedes over here
and 10,000 Argentinians over here, there'll be more Ms
among the, the, the agents
Without, without getting deeply into genics,
I think it would possibly useful to come back to just now
what we're talking about here is, is the desex and,
and the practicalities of it.
I'm sorry, we, we are sort of on a bit of a time.
So, so really, so, so summing up
the views on you, you are advocates for this,
you're saying Yes, if it can be made to happen
and be practical and be enforced, it's, uh,
it's something we should be looking at.
Absolutely. Alright. Sorry. Any sorry, members?
Any other? No, sorry, I, I just, I it was a fascinating
topic we were hitting off down,
but I just, uh, I just trying to,
oh, sorry, one more question.
Thank you. Um, thank you Owen
for your, for your submission.
I just was interested in the enforcement angle
and, um, with a wee bit of local government history where
that you thought that it would be more effective
for the s um, ignoring that large question of funding, just
for the moment, um, SPCA
or Council Animal Control, where would you see that?
And and also the difficulty of,
unless the information is on their registration
for a female dog, you won't necessarily know.
Well, as I understand it, what's been mooted is going
to involve annual renewal of license
and self-reporting by the licensee of
how many puffs they've had.
Um, and having said that, we have
to acknowledge there's a limitation there.
So that's for the registered breeders, I was more meaning
for the ones that are not, are meant to be d sets,
the other are the ones that are, are unregistered our ones,
how that's actually enforced
Well, that any, any dog that comes to notice
that is not desexed
and is not the property of a licensed breeder
should be liable to desex him.
Okay.
Alright. Okay. Look, thanks.
Uh, I, um, very, very interesting.
So, um, we've now have got, um, we've, we've located the
And Zealand Veterinary Association
Association. So,
um, I'll at the stage vacate the chair
and hand over to my, um, deputy chair.
Le thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Slide on over.
Come on over here. Hello, Becky.
Hello. My apologies for, for being late.
No problems. Thank you very much for making the time.
Um, so my name, my name's Greg Fleming,
I'm the deputy chair, but in the absence of our chair today,
I will be, uh, finishing off the hearing.
So we've, uh, where you are the last, um,
contributor on the spec
and understand you won't have heard the other submitters,
but are you aware of, we've heard so far from the, uh,
from Dogs New Zealand, from MPI, uh, from SPCA, uh,
and, um, from the, from the petitioners themselves.
Mm-hmm. Uh, um, so we've, we've,
we've covered a lot of material.
You can also take your, uh, submission,
your written submission as read.
Yeah. Uh, uh, we've got 10 minutes starting from now,
so just leave as much time as you would like for questions.
And just before we get going,
if the cameras go round, can I introduce note?
My one colleague's just gone.
So Paula Garcia has just popped
outta the room back in a moment.
To my left is Shannon Halbert
and Ki Celia, Wade Brown and Rachel Boak.
Thanks again. Becky, over to you. Hi
Everyone. Hi. Uh, so
I just have written some, um, some bits
and pieces down that, that I'll read out now, um, sort
of based on our submission.
So, um, apologies again for, for being late.
Um, and thank you for the opportunity to speak on behalf
of the New Zealand Veterinary Association, uh,
and particularly the Companion Animal Veterinarians
branch or Cav.
Um, I'm Becky and I'm the current Cav president.
Um, so we represent over 1300 vets working in companion
animal practice across New Zealand.
Um, as vets, we are on the front lines of animal health
and welfare, and we see the impacts
of dog overpopulation firsthand.
We see it in clinics and shelters and in our communities.
We appreciate the concerns raised by chain dogs awareness
to New Zealand trust and commend
longstanding commitment to animal welfare.
We agree that dog of population
remains a significant concern.
Rescue organizations
and shelters across the country are under immense pressure
with some having to make the decision
to euthanize healthy dogs
because they run out of space and resources.
It's not acceptable, and we
do believe more needs to be done.
However, uh, the NZVA do not support the proposal
to mandate des sexing of all privately owned dogs.
Uh, I'll explain why.
Um, but firstly, I need to explain a little bit of the terms
that I will be using, um,
because some of it's sort of new even to our vet world.
So sterilization means that the dog is unable to reproduce.
Des sexing means that the animal has been sterilized,
so it can't reproduce by the surgical removal of its gonads,
so its ovaries or its testes in a male.
When we remove gonads, we also remove a source of hormones,
and so the dog goes into an abnormal
state of hormone balance.
There is growing evidence worldwide to suggest
that this all, that it is this hormone imbalance
that contributes to some specific health problems in dogs
which have been desexed.
A dog can also be sterilized, so not able to reproduce,
but still have their ovaries and testes
and their hormones produced by them, by removing the uterus
for the female, which is a hysterectomy
or tying off the RIN in the male, which is a vasectomy.
Traditionally, dogs have been sterilized
by des sexing worldwide, but particularly in New Zealand.
But there is a growing movement toward hormone preserving
sterilization so that the animal cannot reproduce,
but still has the beneficial effects
of normal hormone levels.
The petition suggests
that New Zealand dog population is soaring
and approaching 1 million,
but this isn't supported
by the best available data companion animals.
New Zealand estimated their dog population
around 850,000 in 2020.
Their latest estimate from 2024 is actually slightly lower
at 830,000.
The National Dog database tracking all registered dogs shows
an increase of only 2,900 dogs between 2021 and 2023.
That's just a rise of 0.5% in over two years.
We acknowledge that shelters are overwhelmed,
but it's important to base policy on sound data
and the data does not support the claim
that we are seeing explosive growth in the
overall dog population.
The NZVA supports the principle that dogs not intended
for breeding should be sterilized at some point.
Sterilization remains one of the most effective ways
to prevent unwanted litters
and contributes to population control.
It can also provide certain health benefits
and behavioral benefits, such as reducing risk of memory,
cancer and females it performed before their second season.
However, we strongly believe
that desex decisions must be tailored
to the individual animal blanket mandates are too blunt an
instrument for what is in practice a very complex decision.
For example, en large
and giant breed dogs, they're more prone
to orthopedic issues
and early sterilization with removal
of sex hormones can increase those risks.
In many cases, delaying des sexing may be in the dog's best
interest from a health perspective.
There is growing evidence to support this.
And indeed, the world's small animal veterinary association
reproduction control guidelines,
which were just published in 2023, support this strongly.
The veterinary profession is guided
by evidence-based medicine,
and the literature is clear that one size fits all approach
to des sexing can have serious unintended
consequences to the individual dogs.
We believe des Sexing should be done at the right time
for the right reasons, and that requires a conversation
between the owner and the veterinarian.
So what do we suggest?
We believe that the focus should be on targeted,
effective measures, addressing the root cause
of dog overpopulation without infringing on responsible
ownership and individual dog health.
Specifically, NZVA supports mandatory sterilization
of unowned dogs
and puppies being re-homed by sheltered shelters,
rescue groups and councils.
These organizations are doing vital work under pressure
and should be supported
with clear policy preventing further reproduction of dogs
or ready, contributing to the population burden.
Uh, two, improve regulation of dog breeding.
We recommend that all breeders be required to obtain,
to obtain a permit exemption should only be granted
to breeders who are registered with an organization
that enforces strict ethical breeding standards,
including limits on litter numbers, health screening,
and lifetime rehoming support.
Unregulated backyard breeding, which often contributes
to the most shelter overflows must be brought under control.
Three community level desex initiatives,
particularly in high need
or low income areas to support responsible peer ownership.
And four, investment in education, helping New Zealanders
to understand what responsible dog ownership looks like,
why sterilization of dogs matters,
and how to prevent accidental litters.
We would also point to the committee, the committee
to successful International examples.
Countries like Sweden and Switzerland are often cited
for the excellent companion animal welfare outcomes.
Interestingly, these countries do not actually even allow
routine des sexing.
It's actually banned in many cases due to those countries,
deeming it as an unnecessary surgical procedure.
Instead, they've succeeded
through robust breeding regulation, high expectations
of owner responsibility and strong public education
and access to veterinary care.
That faucet. A culture where dogs are treated
as family abandonment is rare
and population control is achieved
through better systems, not through surgery.
So in closing, uh,
we support the intent behind this petition.
We all want fewer unwanted dogs and better welfare outcomes,
but mandatory des dissecting
of all owned dogs is not the right tool for the job.
Instead, we ask the committee to consider
a nuanced veterinary lead approach
to sterilization on an individual animal basis,
but targeted mandatory sterilization for unowned dogs,
tighter regulation of breeding practices,
investment in education and access to veterinary services.
We believe these measures will result in more meaningful,
sustainable improvements
to animal welfare in New Zealand without comp.
That's all I've got. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Becky.
I've got a few minutes of questions.
Can I just ask, um, just a couple first up.
One is around, I was keen to get my head
around these numbers, um,
because obviously the, the, the petition, um, rests, uh,
largely on the fact that numbers are
to a certain degree outta control, uh,
or at least exploding.
You are saying both here
and in your written submission that they're not, um, any,
any, any idea on how we can
reconcile those competing claims?
I'm not sure because we've, we've just taken, um,
those numbers from the Companion Animals New Zealand
Census PET Census.
Um, they're the largest, um,
or largest registry of microchips in the country.
And so we do get a really good idea of, of the dogs
that are out there from them.
Um, and sorry,
So I was gonna say, but couldn't, couldn't that be the,
the answer is that, that that,
that realistically the problem we have in New Zealand is the
explosion of unregistered dogs
who logically wouldn't be counted in your,
in your group. No.
Yeah, possibly.
And, and it would be the same with the, um, with the,
the dogs registered by councils as well
because responsible people register their, their pets and,
and perhaps people that aren't quite as, um, responsible
with their pet ownership don't.
So that could be where they're seeing it. Right.
Which is why we've made the very clear distinction
between owned dogs and unowned dogs.
Right. Um, so those dogs that are,
that are filling up the shelters that are going
through council rehoming pro uh, programs
and other other things, um, we support the desex
of those dogs because they tend to be the ones that cycle
through and, and create the problems.
Um, it's the ones that are owned, um, in families, um,
that we can make these individualized
based approaches to it.
Um, the certainly globally, this whole concept
of one size fits all preview pre-pubertal desing is,
is a thing of the past.
Um, sure. It's not
Just wondering like, just specific
to the New Zealand context. Sure.
Don't, Isn't it, isn't it possible
that the larger problem we have is with owned
unregistered docs?
Uh, that's a hard thing to quantify.
How many are there out there? Right.
Okay. Because I'm just thinking if we,
I'm think this can goes too big in your
fourfold recommendation.
The second one, the question mark I have around it is, is,
uh, if, if the, so the, the, how do people,
how do people functionally stop their dogs from breeding if
they've got dogs that are not dex,
they're not registered breeders themselves
and probably they're not, they're not registered.
How do, how do you functionally stop the adults from
You? You separate them.
So you, if if a female's in season,
which she only does every six months
or so, um, she's confined for a period of two weeks, um,
over her fertile period.
Right. Thank you. Sorry, Rachel, boy has a question here.
Yeah, thank you. Um, um, yeah, I I I'd probably be helpful
to have an offline discussion I think about some
of those numbers because, um, my,
what I'm observing from talking
to people in Auckland in particular is that it is exploding
and I think, um, it's a mixture of those that are owned
and non-owned.
You know, we're starting to see packs of feral dogs now.
Sure. Um, and parts of, of Northland for example.
So, um, I've got two specific lines of questioning just in,
in your expertise as a vet really interested in, um,
talking about sterilization versus des sexing.
I thought it was a really helpful thing to raise.
Um, what's the cost differential?
Is it cheaper to do sterilization or is it more expensive?
'cause I think that's actually quite an
important consideration.
Yeah, sure. So it is, it is such a new procedure here.
Um, the New Zealand Veterinary Association have just redone
our D six guidelines.
We've called them our sterilization guidelines,
and it actually explains these procedures
because nobody's doing them here yet.
There are very few people doing them.
So it's an area that we need to upskill on as, as vets, uh,
in terms of surgical procedure, it should be shorter,
not longer because it's a more simple procedure to, to do.
Uh, and so I,
I personally wouldn't anticipate major cost differences
between the two of them. Okay.
Alright. That's really useful.
And just, sorry, one quick second question, which I asked
of, um, uh, dogs nz,
but, um, you are probably the better person to ask,
there is obviously a lot of, um, knowledge around large dogs
and, um, I think you mentioned about their, you know,
potentially getting things like hip dysplasia
and, you know, um, arthritis and, and, and issues.
Is, is it more of an issue
for purebred pedigree dogs than mixed breed?
Or is mi a mixed breed?
Large dogs also have the same level of, you know,
of issues. Yeah,
Abs absolutely. These,
these conditions, these diseases that we are seeing,
uh, are common amongst any dog.
It doesn't matter what, what the breed is
or if it's a mixed breed, it's not a,
it's not a breed based, um, set of problems.
Yeah. And what it, the, the reason that we are thinking
that they are occurring is
because we're removing that hormone source.
And if you talk to any women that have, um, gone
through menopause or anything like that,
and they talk about the, the difference in the hormonal, um,
uh, the balance that they have in their, in their bodies,
we are just removing the goads from these dogs.
And so the NC VA's approach
to it has definitely become an individual dog approach.
We're looking for the welfare of those individual dogs
whilst recognizing that there is a population problem,
which is why we've made that differentiation between the,
the unknown, the shelter dogs, the dogs going through s BCAs
and other rescues to be DSX versus the dogs living in homes.
Cool. Thank you. Yeah, thank you Becky and Celia.
Thank you. Um, and it, frankly,
I might also see if we can send a written question to, um,
companion animals New Zealand, to clarify.
But this one clarify the, this the can survey of about
just over a thousand people
is randomized across New Zealand.
It's not for registered, um, people
with registered animals. Is it
So that the pet census is looking at all
of those microchips that are registered?
So the survey is, is different. So the the Yeah.
Cans actually hold a database of dogs so they can tell.
Yeah. Yeah. So that's where we got that from.
So that's a survey, that's the census of
what is registered.
But what I was asking is the survey that goes out
to more people mm-hmm.
Who are not necessarily owners of a registered animal.
That is, that was the one that said that 85%
of it would be owned dogs, they may
or may not be registered.
Is that not correct?
I'm not sure what statement
you're referring to at the moment. Sorry.
Okay, nevermind. You can, you can see, I'm sorry,
I dunno which point you are referring to. Well,
I think there was a statement that 85% of, um,
there was another owned dogs the
Previous That was in the previous one. Yes. And
I was just wondering what you Yeah.
Whether you were clear as to
what was coming from the census from the register on
what was coming from the survey, but maybe not. It was the
Previous. Yeah. Yeah.
Thank you. And
You she referred to, I'm sorry, this submitter referred to
that survey also
This Becky did.
I thought so. Maybe not.
Okay. Um, we might wrap it there.
Thank you so much, Becky, for, um,
for both your written submission
and your comprehensive, um, oral one as well.
Really appreciate your, um, the, the, the depth
and breadth of your expertise.
If it's okay, we probably will, um, come back to you, um,
with a couple more questions offline, I think.
I think. Yeah. Um, I see, uh, Rachel and, and,
and Elia particularly knock nodding their heads on that one.
Um, but again, thank you very, very much and No problem.
That completes our public submission.
Um, just, uh, Christine and Sarah still online
or have they have gone?
They're still You. Okay.
Can I just, um, speak to Christine
and Sarah, thank you very much for bringing this,
um, before the committee.
As you can tell, uh, from the length of this,
of this submission and the degree
to which everyone's involved, you've, you've got our, um,
a hundred percent attention and, um, we'll,
we'll now deliberate and then take this through to report.
So I look forward to being back in contact.
Thank you very much.